Journal of Academic Minds Vol. 5, No. £, 53-64, 2011

Mathematics in the Holy Quran

Wan Norliza Wan Bakar
Universiti Teknologi MARA, Kelantan
Email: wliza349@kelantan.uitm.edu.my

ABSTRACT

Mathematics is an understanding about numbers, shapes and connections.
The research done by Islamic scholars in the past was actually based on the
concept of Tawhid (the oneness of God) from the teaching of Islam itself. This
paper discusses the verses from the Holy Quran that explain the concepis of
mathematics such as numbers, shapes and connections. All of the verses do not
only bring up the mathematical concept but also reveal to us its application in
each situation that suits us as human beings. It is hoped that readers will find
this article useful as a guide for them to search for mathematical facts and
reference from the holy Quran as a form of knowledge-based resource.

Keywords: numbers, shapes, connections, mathematic, Holy Quran

Introduction

Mathematics is the study of numbers, shapes and connections.
Mathematician seeks out patterns, formulate new conjectures and establish
truth by rigorous deduction from appropriately chosen axioms and
definition. Mathematics or ‘A/ Hisab’ has been used for 48 times in the
al-Quran. It illustrates that Mathematics play a big role in our life. The
word “Hisab’ or calculation is used widely in al-Quran and it covers a lot
of meaning.

One of the examples is in Surah Yunus (10: 5) that brings the meaning
on how to calculate the time:

‘Itis He who made the sun to be a shining glory and the moon to be
a light (of beauty), and measured out stages for her; that ye might
know the number of years and the count (of time). Nowise did
Allah create this but in truth and righteousness, (Thus) doth He
explain His Signs in detail, for those who understand’.

ISSN 1823-6634

© 2611 Journal of Academic Minds, Universiti Teknologi MARA, Kelantan, 18500 Machang,
Kelantan Darul Naim

33
Journal of Academic Minds

Mathematics is used throughout the world as an essential tool in
many fields. The earliest used of mathematics were in trading, land
measurement, painting, weaving patterns and the recording of time. More
complex mathematics did not appear until 3000 BC where Babylonians
and Egyptians began to use mathematics for taxation and other financial
calculations for building, construction and for astronomy. In modern world,
mathematics is being used in natural science, engineering, medical and
social science. Applied mathematics inspires and makes use of new
mathematical discoveries and sometimes leads to development of entirely
new mathematical disciplines such as statistics and game theory.

The History of Mathematics

The area of study known as the ‘history of mathematics’ is an investigation
into the origin of discoveries in mathematics. The study of mathematics
begins in the 6 century B.C. with the Pythagoreans who coined the term
‘Mathematics’ from the ancient Greek meaning ‘subject of instruction’.
Chinese mathematics made early contribution including a place value
system. Hindu-Arabic numeral systems and the use of its operations is in
used throughout the world today. Islamic mathematics in turn developed
and expanded the mathematics known to this civilization. In the history
of Islam mathematics is an ancient knowledge that has been exposed in
the east and west by the only resource that leads to it being a gift from
God to His servants. God taught this knowledge to Adam A.S. Mathematic
also is a knowledgeable data for the Arabic people for they used it in the
business, in dividing the value of the ancestors’ properties and so on.
The number is actually written in a word not with the figure. After
that, the Arabic people change the word system to the numbers after the
numeral system in many languages has been used. During Prophet
Muhammad’s time, mathematics is used in their business, architecture
and also war. This knowledge has spreading to the entire world and
keeps on expanding during the Islamic glorification period between 7H
until 13H. The Islamic figures have contributing and creating a lot of new
things in this field such as, plus, minus, multiply and divide. This
mathematical fact has been published in Arabic language by
mathematicians from Persia. From ancient times through Middle Ages
burst of mathematical creativity were often followed by stagnation.
Beginnings in Renaissance Italy in the 16th century new mathematical

54
Mathematics in the Holy Quran

development interacting with new scientific discoveries were made at an
increasing pace.

The Invention of Mathematical Knowledge by
Islamic Scholars

According to Shahari Md Zain and Abdul Latif Samian (2007), the invention
of mathematical knowledge by Islamic scholars can be described in the
cycle diagram below.

. THE AL ‘ Ne - | CIFE St

Boh \ HUTA
en See

LE GE
re UF THE
bees \  ReTho

\erren \ eaten
remmns Na saer

THE
1 AMIR . Cer ITI
SND LIFE
Hr . y

PP LIFE cat
HUnleH tg .
Birla : re
{hiB™s. _
Figure 1: The Cycle Diagram

In the above diagram, the basic source of mathematical studies
starts from Allah, the creator, inspiring the knowledge to human kind
through the Holy Quran. Due to the understanding of the concept that
has been revealed in the Holy Quran Muslims scholar then proceed with
a research and discover new mathematical knowledge. The knowledge
can then be applied to the needs of the societies to solve any problem

55
Mathematics in the Holy Quran

development interacting with new scientific discoveries were made at an
increasing pace.

The Invention of Mathematical Knowledge by
Islamic Scholars

According to Shahari Md Zain and Abdul Latif Samian (2007), the invention
of mathematical knowledge by Islamic scholars can be described in the
cycle diagram below.

THE HOLY ®

6OOl

DEFINITF)
| OLS

Figure 1: The Cycle Diagram

In the above diagram, the basi¢ source of mathematical studies
starts from Allah, the creator, inspiring the knowledge to human kind
through the Holy Quran. Due to the understanding of the concept that
has been revealed in the Holy Quran Muslims scholar then proceed with
a research and discover new mathematical knowledge. The knowledge
can then be applied to the needs of the societies to solve any problem

55
Journal of Academic Minds

related to mathematics. The mathematical scholar then realized that the
intelligence in them is actually comes from Allah. Therefore the awareness
will increase their faith to Allah.

The above mentioned fact is supported by many researchers in
mathematics. According to Afzalur Rahman (1994), mathematical scholars
of Islamic intellectual tradition are to make al-Quran as a source of stimulus
to continue research in Mathematic. Dr Maurice Bucaille (1979) said, al-
Quran is the source that motivates the Muslim mathematician to pursue
their study in this field. The cleverness of Muslim has been recognized
by Prof Dr Carra de Paux. ‘Muslims already have the development in
their knowledge. They taught us how to do the calculation until we
mastered it. They got the algebra and logic knowledge. They developed
it until they get the analytical facts. There is no doubt that they are the
first who obtained this trigonometry data from the Yunans before. Thus,
the development of arithmetic, algebra and other knowledge has been
search out by the Muslims because all of the main points are all found in
the al-Quran.

For the Islamic Mathematic scholars, mathematic is the obligation
or responsibility that they have to do to find the easy way to the paradise
later. There are differences between Islamic and non Islamic scholars
way of thinking. For the Islamic scholars, when they found difficulties
they will pray and seek for Allah’s help. They will raise their performances
toward the Creator such as staying longer in the mosque.

There are several examples on how mathematics being used in
different situations and context. The latter discussion will focus on
numbers, shapes and connections.

The Concept of Numbers in the Holy Quran

A number is a mathematical object used in counting and measuring. A
notational symbol which represents a number is called as ‘numeral’.
Numerals are often used for labels (phone numbers), for ordering (serial
numbers) and for codes (ISBN). The first known use of numbers dates
back to around 3500 BC in Mesopotamia and the earliest known base 10
system dates to 3100 BC in Egypt. The usage of bones and artifacts has
been used for counting time like number of days and keeping a record of
quantities such as animals, Al-Quran has already mentioned the important

56
Mathematics in the Holy Quran

digits used in mathematical knowledge such as number 1 until 10. As the
example

a. Number 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Surah Al-Nisa’ verse 3.

‘If ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans, marry
women of your choice, two, three or four but if ye fear that ye shall not
be able to deal justly (with them) then only one or a captive that your
right hands possess. That will be more suitable to prevent you from doing
injustice’(4: 3).

The knowledge of numbers 1 to 4 has been used especially in Islamic
marriage. In Islam, a man is allowed to marry a woman of his choice. He
may marry two, three or four women under the circumstance that he can
be fair to all his wives.

b. Number 5,6,7,8 in Surah Al-Kahfi verse 22

“(Some) say they were three, the dog being the fourth among them
Lothers) say they were five, the dog being the sixth, guessing at the
unseen; (yet others) say they were seven, the dog being the eight. Say
(O Muhammad SAW): “My lord knows best their number: none knows
them but a few” So debate not (about their number, etc) except with the
clear proof (which We revealed to you). And consult not any of them
(people of the Scripture, Jews and Christians) about the affair of the
people of the cave’ (18: 22).

c. Number 9, in Surah Al-Naml verse 48
‘There were in the city nine men of a family, who made mischief in the
land, and would not reform’ (27:48).

Other than that there are also, other numbers in mathematic such
as:

d. Number 300 in surah Al-Kahfi verse 25
‘So they stayed in their Cave three hundred years, and (some) add nine
(more)’

The discovery of the concepts of numbers in the Holy Quran played
a great role to mathematical knowledge because it inspires the
mathematician to go further in expanding the knowledge. One of the
famous Islamic Mathematical scholars is Al Khindi (801-873). His real
name is Abu Yusuf Yaqub Ibni Ishaq Ai Khindi. His greatest contribution
is about the 11 texts used to elaborate about numbers and how to analyze

37
Journal of Academic Minds

them. Other famous Islamic Mathematical Scholars is Al Khawarizmi
(835-844) or the real name is Muhamad Musa Al Khawarizmi. He is
famous for his intelligence in mathematics. He produced “Al Jabar Wal
Mugabalah’ that has more than 800 solutions for mathematical problems.
During 12" century, this book has been translated to the Latin language
and has been taught in European High School until the end of 16" century.
Another Muslim contributor, Al Hassar, a mathematician from the
Maghreb (North Africa) in the 12" century has developed the modern
symbol mathematical notation for fractions where the nominator and
denominator are separated by a horizontal line.

The Middle Ages saw the acceptance of zero negative and fractional
numbers. Islamic mathematicians merged the concept of number and
magnitude into a more general idea of real number. The Egyptian
Mathematician Abu Kamil Shuja Ibnu Aslam was the first to accept
irrational numbers as solution quadratic equations. Then, in 10" century
the Iraqi mathematician Al Hashimi provided general roofs for irrational
numbers. In number theory, Ibnu Al Haytham solved problems involving
congruence using what is now called as Wilson’s Theorem. Another
contribution to number theory is his work on perfect numbers.

In the abovementioned discussion it is proven that the Holy Quran
has played a vital role in encouraging Muslims scholar to do great research
and reach to new discoveries in mathematics.

The Concept of Shapes in the Holy Quran

A shape is a geometric figure that can be mathematically defined. Shapes
are defined in terms of the mathematical objects they are embedded in
two dimensional shapes are defined in terms of the plane, three dimensional
objects in terms of the space. The examples of 2D shapes are circles,
squares, triangles and ovals. The 3D shapes are spheres, cubes, cones,
pyramids, hemispheres, cuboids and cylinders. The knowledge of shapes
is important to find the solutions for daily problems such as to know the
exact width and length of the length, to create the design for buildings,
earthenware and carpet.

The concept of shapes has been mentioned in the Holy Quran .The
most easy example is about the shape of earth .For many centuries people
believed that the is flat with no idea that earth is spherical. The Quran
mentions the actual shape of the earth in the following verse:

38
Mathematics in the Holy Quran

‘And we have made the earth egg shaped’ (An-Naziat: 30)

The Arabic word ‘Dahaha’ means egg shaped. It also means an
expanse. Dahaha is derived from Duhiya which specifically refers to
the egg of an ostrich which is geospherical in shape, exactly like the
shape of the earth.

From this knowledge, Sheikh Ahmad Al Khatib in his book ‘Raudat
Al Hussab fi Ihm Al Hisab’ do the research and said that the sphere has
a surface with the same line from the centre of it and has been showed
in 3 matra while the round shape in 2 matra, Also in Raudat Al Hussab,
sphere is mentioned as ‘A/kurrah’ and the example for ‘Alkurrah’ is al
Ard (the earth).

Length is another element in geometry. There are verses in al-
Quran that discussed about how to evaluate the length. This is happened
because of the tilt of the earth’s axis for 23.5 degree and with the circular
movement on the axis and also on the same time if loops around the sun.
Allah has mentioned in Surah Al-Fatir verse 13 about the differences
between the length of night and the day. He merges Night into Day, and
he merges Day into Night, and he has subjected the sun and the moon (to
his Law): each one runs its course for a term appointed. Such is Allah
your Lord: to Him belongs all Dominion. And those whom ye invoke
besides Him have not the least power. There are a lot of verses that
describe about the architecture. One of the verses is Surah Al-Shu’ara’:
129

‘And do ye get for yourselves fine buildings in the hope of
living therein (for ever)?’

The description of the art of bricks in Surah Al-Qasas verse 38

Pharaoh said: “O Chiefs! No god do I know for you but myself:
therefore, O Haman! Light me a (kiln to bake bricks) out of
clay, and build me a lofty palace, that I may mount up to the
god of Moses: but as far as I am concerned, I think (Moses) is
a liar!’

The art of weapon in Surah Al-Hadid verse 25

‘We sent aforetime our apostles with Clear Signs and sent down
with them the Book and the Balance (of Right and Wrong),
that men may stand forth in justice; and We sent down Iron, in
which is (material for) mighty war, as well as many benefits for

59
Journal of Academic Minds

mankind, that Allah may test who it is that will help, Unseen,
Him and His apostles: For Allah is Full of Strength, Exalted in
Might (and able to enforce His Will).

The art of the carpet in Surah Al-Kahfi verse 31

‘For them will be Gardens of Eternity; beneath them rivers will

flow, they will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold, and
they will wear green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade:
They will recline therein on raised thrones. How good the
recompense! How beautiful a couch to recline on!’

The art of porcelain in Surah Al-Waqiah verse 18

‘With goblets, (shining) beakers, and cups (filled) out of clear-
flowing fountains’.

Although Muslim Mathematicians are most famed for their work
on number systems they also made considerable contributions on the
development of algebraic geometry. The motivation that comes from the
al-Quran creates the idea to Syeikh Tantawi Jauhari to write Al Jawahir
fi Tafsir al-Quran where in this book there are about 750 verses related
to science and mathematics. This translation is recognized as the
translation of the knowledge and it is different with the others.

A famous mathematician, Al Khawarizmi has undertaken a
systematic application of algebra to geometry. Al Mahani (820C) conceived.
the idea of reducing geometrical problems such as duplicating the cube
to problems in algebra. Thabit Ibn Qurra (836C) played an important role
in preparing the way for such important mathematical discoveries such
as analytic geometry and non-eucledian geometry.

The knowledge of the concept of shapes in the Holy Quran too, has
given a lot of benefit not only to the mathematicians but for the layman to
use it in building professions such as carpentry and engineering, land
surveying, navigation and astronomy.

The Concept of Connections in the Holy
Quran

Aconnection is arelationship of entities. It is also called as ‘the structure
of mathematics’. The set of real numbers has several connections or
structures, for example, an order is an organization of numbers where

60
Mathematics in the Holy Quran

each number is either less or more than other number, algebraic structure
is an operation of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, ratio and a
measure is an interval along the real line that have a certain length.
There are a lot of concepts in the al-Quran that mentioned about
connections such addition, minus, multiplication and division.

The Concept of Addition

The concept of addition has been mentioned in the Holy Quran whereby
Allah said in Surah Al-Kahfi verse 25 meaning:

‘And they stayed in their cave three hundred solar years and
add nine for lunar years’

The concept of addition can be used especially in the field of business
where the profit can be calculated. It can also be used in accounting
where all the entities can be put in a table an all the debits and credits can
be counted.

The Concept of Minus
The minus concept in Surah Al-Ankabut verse 14

‘We (once) sent Noah to his people, and he tarried among
them a thousand years less fifty: but the Deluge overwhelmed
them while they (persisted in) sin’.

Also, the concept of minus can be applied to the field of business to
calculate the balance of money that the customer will received after
giving an amount of money to the cashier .

The Concept of Multiply
The multiply concept in Surah Al-Hadid verse 18

‘For those who give in Charity, men and women, and loan to
Allah a Beautiful Loan, it shall be increased manifold (to their
credit), and they shall have (besides) a liberal reward’.

The multiply concept can be seen in our lives when we are doing
good deeds to other people.Allah will blessed us with double or triple
rewards in the Day-After.

61
Journal of Academic Minds

The Concept of Divide

The divide concept in Surah Aal-Nisa’ verse 11

‘Allah commands you as regards your children inheritance: to
the male a portion equal to that of two females: if there are
only daughters two or more, their share is two thirds of the
inheritance; if only one, her share is half. For parents, a sixth
share of inheritance to each if the deceased left children, if no
children and the parents are the only heirs the mother has a
third; if the deceased left brothers or sisters the mother has a
sixth. The distribution in all cases is after the payment of
legacies he may have bequeathed or debts. You know not which
of them, whether your parents or your children are nearest to
you in benefit these fixed shares are ordained by Allah. And
Allah is Ever All Knower All Wise’.

The concept of division is applied in the distribution of the heritage
from a dead person. It is called as ‘Faraid’. This law will ensure justice
where every person will get a real proportion that he should obtained.

The Concept of Ratio

The concept of ratio in Surah An Nisa’ verse 7

‘There is a share for men and a share for women from what is
left by parents and those nearest related, whether the property
be smail or large- a legal share’.

Again, the concept of ratio which is similar to the concept of division
can be used the distribution of heritage

The basis of mathematics is the knowledge about compare and
contrast that had been mentioned in surah Al-Hajj verse 47

‘And they ask pou to hasten on the torment! And Allah fails not
His promise. And verily a day with your Lord is as a thousand
years of what you reckon’.

The knowledge about the differences between the number of the
days in the earth and other planets has been used by the astronauts.

There are a lot more concepts that have been mentioned in the
Holy Quran in the purpose of guiding men to reveal more knowledge on

62
Mathematics in the Holy Quran

it. Thus, it is the duty of mankind to go and search for the knowledge in
the Holy Quran.

Conclusion

The Holy Quran is ‘a precious gift of knowledge from the God to the
human being. It contains a lot of concepts in all fields especially in
mathematics. Therefore, it is the obligation of human being to start
searching for the concepts recorded in the Holy Quran and do great
research on it for the benefit of the society.

References

Abdul Rahman, A. (1988). Sejarah tamaddun Islam. Kuala Lumpur:
Teks Publishing.

Afzalur, R. (1994). Indeks al-Quran (terjemahan Yusof Ismail). Kuala
Lumpur: Percetakan Zafar Sdn Bhd.

Ahmad Abdul Latif, A. (1910). Raudat al hussab fi ilmu hisab. Mesir:
Percetakan AlMaimuniyyah Al Halabi.

Ali Abdul Hamid, A.A. (2004). A-OQuran dan sains moden. Jakarta:
Penerbit Bulan Bintang.

Bucaille, M. (1979). Bible, Quran dan sains moden, Jakarta: Penerbit
Bulan Bintang.

David, W. (2005) Prime Numbers: Most mysterious figures in maths.
U.S.A: John Wiley and Sons.

Harun, Y. (2005). Allah’s miracles in the Quran. New Delhi: Goodword
Books.

Harun, Y. (2009). Keajaiban Al-Quran. Retrieved May 20, 2009 from
http://www. Keajaiban Al-Quran.com/astronomy- roundhtml

Harun, Y. (2009). Miracles of the Quran. Retrieved May 23, 2009
from http:/Avww.miraclesofthe quran.

Imam. Munawwir (1985). Mengenal peribadi 30 pendekar dan pemikir
Islam. Surabaya: PT Bina Ilmu.

Jauhari, 8.T. (1900). Al-Jawahir fi Tafsir Al-Quran Al-Karim, Hilid 2.

Kaiz,V.J. (1995). 4 history of mathematics. New York: Harper Collins
College Publisher.

63
Journal of Academic Minds

Maarop Mohamad Noh (2009, October 10). 4/-Quran menjana ilmu
matematik. Retrieved from http://www.webspawner.com/users/ieyla/
index.html

Mahbob, M. (2010). Beberapa aspek asas dalam perakaunan Islam.
Shah Alam. UPENA.

Mahmood Mohd Taib, A.N. (1971). Sejarah Tamaddun Islam. Kuala
Lumpur: Teks Publishing.

Mansour Hassab-Elnaby (2008, December 12). A New Astronomical
Quranic Method for the Determination of the Greatest Speed C.
Retrieved from http://www islamicity com/Science/
960703A.SHTML.

Mat Rofa, I. Sejarah aritmetik dan aljabar Islam. Selangor: Shah
Alam.

Number (2011, February 2). Retrieved from http://www.en wikipedia.org.

Radient, Z. (2009). Understanding Islam: Logical of Al-Quran
Verses.Retrieved from http://www.radiniz.com/blog/

Shahari, M.Z. & Abdul Latif, $, (2007). Pengislaman Sains Matematik.
Selangor: Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia.

Shapes (2011, February 8). Retrieved from http://www.en wikipedia.org.

64
